[audio playing...]
I call what I do cultural activism. I
founded spirit fest as a way to say
something loudly together about human
rights, LGBTQ plus rights, feminism and
inclusion, using arts in public spaces
to raise civic awareness,
asking how can we claim our rights to
live in the city and to change it?
Of course. Now we claim our rights to
our cities in a different way with the
weapons
as the artists and journalists lft
national Csaba doesn't make a story,
which reminds me of before the full
scale invasion, the many people
protested, found in Mariupol to speak
loudly that his flowers bloomed. We were
planning and dreaming to make this choir
of cultural interventions.
As a listen to Elif Tina, a question how
is it possible to explain all of this to
you?
How could I describe this huge
chandelier with Hannah from the ceiling
of marucho drama theater.
And what's happened to its Christos when
the rocket hit the theater, because it
must be too big to have completely
disappeared.
And it's important to speak a fascist
from the chandelier when hundreds of
people were killed in the theater.
I was born and lived in Mariupol all my
life. I loved it very much. I'm from a
factory workers dynasty. But I dreamt of
being a journalist.
In 2014, when everything started, my son
was born.
He was my universe. So despite all of
this crucial situations, I was
concentrating on being a mother.
Then the Russians shelled Mariupol in
2015. And it was a huge shock.
A lot of people died. A lot of kids
and from that moment, we understood what
war is.
It was very scary.
And it mobilized people because we were
afraid to be occupied. I decided to
become a journalist to work on TV, and
to challenge the Russian propaganda that
Mario police Russian city with the
Russian culture, showing instead,
Ukrainian artists forwards Fine Arts. A
lot of art festivals, cultural events
and exhibitions became inspired in this
period and appeared in the city.
He was like fresh water that clenched a
dry throat. A synergy of artists, local
people and audiences
are art became united with this
industrial landscape like flowers that
grew from the concrete.
Donetsk was occupied and on the road
there for more Upul, a performance
called The Way Home was created.
It ended on the bridge with the
resurrection of a huge iron sculpture,
symbolizing the tree of life.
When the full scale invasion began, we
thought we already knew what troubles
were. But we did not imagine how
merciless Russians can be.
From the beginning, a lot of people lost
their homes because of shelling.
There was no water, no food,
no electricity,
no internet or mobile connection.
Mariupol drama theater became a
humanitarian and informational point.
By March, it was already impossible to
leave the city. And there were rumors
that there would be an evacuation from
the theater.
Me and my son went every day. But the
evacuation never happened.
On the 16th of March, I was at home
preparing to sleep in the courtyard with
our neighbors from our building.
This was the only way we could cook and
everyone was hungry.
I came up to the apartment with the kids
to eat. And then there was a huge
explosion.
The bomb had landed in the courtyard and
we could not see anything because dust
was everywhere.
My brother took the smaller kids and
adults big
In two days
we found our neighbor's bodies under the
rubble.
After that, we understood that no one
and nothing was serious.
We decided to walk buy food from Marine
LePen.
As we fled, we could see the fire from
the explosion of the marine fuel drama
theater.
It was the same plane that dropped the
bomb on my home.
The whole city was on fire with clouds
of smoke, so we didn't know the measure
of the tragedy that took place in the
theater.
Later, we heard that hundreds of people
lay in the ashes.
It was a big shock.
It was clearly marked as a theatre. And
they were huge letters written outside
on the ground, saying children
when the Russians occupied the city,
they didn't take the bodies from under
the ruins of the theater.
So no one knows the exact number of
people that died in this tragedy.
They took all ashes and transported them
somewhere, dropping them just like
trash.
And then they made the surface concrete
and began to use the space for contents.